Giovanni, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Hello, Michael. Thank you for having me on the show.
Yeah. It's great to have you on the show.
Thank you.
Some people you learn about just from
their public speaking or their writing,
and other people you meet through their projects.
I got to know you through Granian,
your Rust-based Python and other thing,
web server that I thought was really awesome,
started playing with it and we started talking on GitHub around some ideas and then here you are
sort of explored more learn more about some of your frameworks that like you created from so
I'm excited to talk about Emmett, Granian and a bunch of other things that you built like kind
of all to go together in a big big mix there yeah yeah I'm excited as well yeah it should be a lot
of fun before though before we get into all the details of all that stuff you know just tell us a
yeah sure so um i'm giovanni barillari i actually born in italy but today i'm living in vienna in
austria um i'm actually a physicist um so yeah i graduated in physics at the university um and
but let's say i started working as a software engineer um focused especially on
web software um pretty soon after the university so it's like 10 years something um i'm working
as a software engineer also like as a cypher diabetes engineer so let's just say i'm quite
like on the back-end side of the things usually um and i also started i actually started like
contributing to open source uh software projects uh even before actually uh started working as a
software engineer um and particularly i started like contributing to the web2py project um it's
uh quite old uh project by uh massimo di piero um and um yeah today i'm working as a cypher
lab engineer for century uh i bet that pretty much of the people uh know about century um
yeah i didn't know yeah awesome yeah i didn't even know that you worked for century until
you know just a few minutes ago that's pretty awesome obviously people know century
they're big supporters of the show and sponsor some of the episodes but yeah how's it like to
work at century must be fun well it's super nice um a lot of talented people uh they're super nice
it's a really nice environment to be within so yeah i'm super happy yeah awesome what is a software
reliability engineer do um so let's say uh it might be a complicated question because like
actually the original title comes from google um so let's say is kind of related to um infrastructure
and monitoring in software.
So let's say to simplify that it's about be sure
that everything runs smoothly with no incidents and stuff.
Make sure you can monitor bugs, slowdowns, work on failover
type of situations, that kind of stuff.
Exactly.
I imagine you probably use Sentry to monitor Sentry
for reliability.
Is that right?
- Yes, we have this project called like Sentry for Sentry,
which is like a separated Sentry instance
that monitors the actual Sass instance of Sentry.
- It's pretty interesting.
'Cause of course, if Sentry went down,
you're using it to monitor it.
Everyone else uses Sentry to monitor their thing.
Then it's not about when their code goes down,
it doesn't affect it.
But when your code goes down,
it might actually affect your ability to know that it's down.
So a separate copy that's wild.
Okay, I hadn't even thought of that.
Super cool.
All right, now, first of all,
there's a little bit of love out in the audience
for your whole larger project, Emmett.
So Tushar says, did you say Emmett?
Emmett is amazing, which is super cool.
Tools like that encourage him to work on his dev tooling,
which is really great.
Before we get into the details of that, though,
Like, why create another web framework?
I don't mean this in a negative way.
It's just like there's already, there's Flask and Django,
and then we have FastAPI.
Yeah, there's a lot.
So why not just go, oh, I'm just going to use this one?
Like, what inspired you to go?
Like, I think I'll make one of them.
So I think we should go back a bit in time
because actually like this year will be like the 10th birthday of like Emmet.
So let's just say it's like a long time.
So it's not bad.
Okay.
Yeah.
So originally it was released as it had a different name.
It was called Weppy.
And I changed the name in 2020, I think,
like when I moved from Synchronous Paradigm
to the Synchronous one.
So let's say at the time I designed WebP,
so the original version in 2014,
the the main thing was about um so in in that time like it was like the time of ruby and rails being
super popular and um and i originally um started working in web development using ruby rails um
And when comparing, let's say, the amount of, let's say, batteries, including the box of RubyRace to the Python ecosystem.
So let's say that the major competitor at that point in time was Django.
But let's say that the feeling I got from Django at that time compared to RubyRace.
was completely different um in a sense that i found myself like um spending much more time on on
building stuff compared to compared to um rubin race um and this is also what like um
bring me to the what to pi project or to pi community because it was in a sense uh
pretty similar in in some of the design decisions um with with raw and um
but at the same time like once you know once you start contributing to to to a web framework you
you you have time to like to dig into a lot of the internals and decisions and and so um web2pi
at that time so i used web2pi to to build my first um the code behind my first startup actually um
and um it had quite a lot of scaling issues at that time um so
let's say at that point in time i just you know um was looking out for the options and
uh i started like digging into the code internals of django and also flask um
which i mean i really loved like the flask approach uh of things but at the same time
it was so micro uh i mean like to to build an actual project it required like to have like
tons of extensions and and other pieces let's say other libraries to add it to the project that um
yeah i think like i ended up just you know saying okay let's let's just rebuild web to buy the way
I want it.
And that's eventually how WebP came out.
And today Emmet.
Yeah, that's pretty much the story behind it.
Okay.
Yeah, I didn't realize I went that far back.
How about Granian?
Is that newer?
Yeah, Granian is, I think, like, the first public release is, like, from one year ago or something.
Yeah, because I learned about Emmet through Granian.
like oh it's kind of all probably all the same project i didn't realize the history why the
new name why emmet um so the thing was that um um to support let's say the upgrade um
between wepi and emmets so since like all the interfaces has to be changed to support like a sync
uh codes um the idea was to um provide let's say uh a quick way to to do that meaning that uh
to make it possible for for developers to you know install like a new version of of wepi and
getting like everything broken because of you know the new uh the new interfaces so
Yeah, I just decided to change the interface and also changing the package name in order to say,
if you want to upgrade, you can upgrade safely.
Otherwise, you can stick.
It's like a super mega version change.
Not only you change the version, but you change the name.
Yeah, exactly.
That's interesting.
All right.
Well, let's dive into it.
So I like the title, Emmett, the Web Framework for Inventors.
And maybe give us a sense of what are some of the core features of Emmett
and what are your goals with building it?
So the idea was to have like all-in-one, let's say, framework to build web application.
All-in-one, let's say, in a sense of, again, when the project actually started.
So, like, even 10 years after that, I still usually prefer to develop web projects without relying too much on front-end frameworks.
So, this is, like, a big, let's say, preamble to the thing.
Like, this is originally from an era where, like, front-end framework built exists.
Like, I think it was just AngularJS and maybe Ember at that time.
Yeah.
You're basically describing my life in 2024, so I'm a big fan of the server-side frameworks,
you know?
Exactly.
Yeah, also because, like, it seems sometimes that we reinvent, like, a lot of stuff to catch
like, the beginning at the end.
Like, yeah, I felt like all of the theme
about server-side rendering with front-end frameworks
and server-side render components and all that kind of stuff.
So sometimes it just feels we're getting back to the origins.
But yeah.
So yeah, the idea behind AMET is to have like all-in-one solution to develop web applications.
So you have all the standard features you have with the web framework, so like routing and
middlewares and that kind of stuff. You have an ORM, you have a templating system,
plus a few let's say uh tools embedded with him so for instance it's very easy to use i don't know
sessions or to have an authentication system um it's all like provided inside the box um
so yeah the idea was to have like let's say a battery of tools like in one place to
do the most common things when you start developing a web application um yeah very nice so yeah like
you said it has an orm built in and it feels i guess sql alchemy ish in a sense but not not exactly
the same or jingo orm would be you know another way uh in some ways there um yeah i think it's more
near to yeah uh to sql alchemy in that sense um you tend to have like an api for using python
objects to build queries rather than um how to say uh use like a lot of strings attributes like
you usually tends to do in in django um yeah i mean it's it's more close to sql alchemy in that
in that sense um i think like the major difference with um the rms out there is that um
it the model class you defines are not like um so when when you for example uh select records
from the database uh the single let's say rows you select are not um instances of the model class
um so let's say like the model class acts more like um management class a schema definition
sort of thing yeah i mean it does like a lot of helpers uh on top of that uh but um yeah i think
like it's the definitely the major difference between like i think like the vast majority of
or m's out there for python when you usually have like the model class which is also like
the the class of all the uh records you you you select and and work on from this yeah so what
do you get back in this world here i'm sorry what what do you get if you do a query like in your
example on the home page you have a so so what do you get back when you get a a group of them a set
of them so you get like um a different class so there's like um a separated class um every model
has um it's uh it's called like row class um so it's an instance of that class uh and this design
it's mostly made for two reasons like the first one is performance in a sense um meaning that um
it meaning that when you select records or operate on records it avoids to you know uh
fulfill like all those objects with the actual model class uh attributes or or functions or
methods and stuff yeah yeah um and on the other end was also to um kind of remind to the developer
that he is working with actual data from the database
and not like real Python objects in a sense,
which is, I think like in the years
is like the first reason why people tend to object against ORMs.
So those two were the main reasons behind this design.
It's something like in the between of an ORM
and just some database abstraction layer.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
I like the query syntax.
People visit the homepage, you'd see something like
timetravel.where, then lambda of t goes to t.returned equal equal true.
And while some of the ORMs let you write code in terms of like the class fields or whatever,
it's never looked quite right because you're working with, say, the static value out of the class,
whereas what you really are trying to talk about is the instance level of the record, right?
So instead of saying T, you would say time travel dot return, but we'd never test that because it's the global value of it, right?
and stuff like that.
Or you just use strings,
which is basically, in my mind, no good.
But what's cool, you know,
also, do you want to do an or or an and?
And then what weird thing do you import
to do the or?
And like, you know,
how do you wrap the query
and all that kind of stuff?
Whereas if it's a Lambda,
you can just express the conditions.
Yeah, yeah.
That's pretty much the idea.
So like to use, you know,
special methods from Python objects
and translate those expressions in actually SQL code.
So, yeah.
Nice.
Yeah, for my apps, I have a combination of Beanie and MongoEngine,
depending on which one you're talking about.
And for MongoEngine, you do things that are pretty funky.
Like if you want to say greater than you would say like time,
time travel dot, I don't know. It doesn't have a value, but age,
let's say there's an age,
like time travel dot age underscore underscore GT equals value.
And you're like, well, it's not, it's not equal to it. And it's not that,
that's not the name of it. But, but okay.
I guess that means, you know what I mean?
Like there's a real weird way it's like jammed into a syntax.
whereas like here you say greater than whatever right yeah yeah yeah it's like the same of
of it's one of the things i dislike and still today of django or um in that sense
i mean it it has like a lot of a lot more capabilities because for instance like when
you want to represent like complex queries um it tends to be more powerful uh in that sense
uh meaning that special methods are limited so at some point you start making you know um custom
methods so like um i don't know starts with like in a set yeah starts with or in in this set or
So I think, yeah, there are pros and cons in both, let's say, approaches.
Yeah, cool.
All right, so we have a lot to talk about,
even though all this code fits on one screen.
The other part is to define an endpoint.
This is about an API, right?
So you have an async def, which is awesome.
It supports async and await.
I think it's super valuable.
Yeah, one note is that the RM is still synchronous.
Yeah, yeah.
So what about that?
Are you planning on adding an async thing,
or are you just saying it's just synchronous?
So it's like a very long story in a sense
because I started asking myself the same question
several years ago.
And I think at some point,
probably I will end up doing that.
um in the same way sql alchemy did that uh even if like I remember like
um uh a super nice blog post from from the author of sql alchemy uh stating that
asynchronous code and and databases are not the best way to to use that um so yeah let's say like
in in the last few years i just you know waited in a way to to see what everyone else was doing
But yeah, I think at some point, it will be inevitable in a sense.
I just don't feel the time has come yet.
So we'll see.
Yeah, cool.
And then I guess the last thing to talk about
is you have a decorator app.route, pretty straightforward.
But then you also have a @service.json.
What's this decorator do?
so uh you can think about that decorator uh like the service decorator as like the jsonify function
in in um in flask so yeah yeah um uh in emmet you have like both the json service and the xml service
yeah because like
in old times I had
to write stuff to you know talk
with XML and points
and stuff like that so
yeah
so yeah it's just you know an easy way
to wrap and say
everything that returns from
this function just serializing
JSON or XML or
whatever
if I return rather than a response
just return a dictionary and
it'll do the serialization right exactly nice and the audience uh let's asks does it generate an
open api documentation like auto does it automatically generate documentation um so uh from
uh standard routes no um there's an extension though um meaning that if you plan to design um
rest uh let's say apis uh with emmet there's an extension for that uh it's called emmet rest
uh which um let's say uh gives you like more tools to structure uh your road your roots and and
and uh serialization and this serialization and all that kind of stuff and that extension also brings
uh open api uh documentation generation um eventually the let's say the open api
documentation generation will come also to um plain routes in in emmet but um there's
quite a few of design implied uh to do that meaning that
um it's so emets it's like not designed to have a strong uh type system uh because again it comes
from the days where like i didn't exist was not yeah um so so let's say that uh for instance for
frameworks like fast api which are practically designed on top of something like by dantic so you
have like a strong typing system so everything that comes in and out from the majority of routes you
write um has types and so it's really easy for for for the framework to inspect the code and
and understand what's going on um on let's say general frameworks like emmet where you i
I mean, you might have, like, I don't know, HTML routes
or other kind of stuff going on.
There's no, let's say, design behind that
to support in the first play, like, strong typing.
So, yeah, making, like, OpenAPI documentation
out of standard embed routes involves, like, quite a lot of...
decisions um so yeah we'll see we'll see yeah okay yeah very cool yeah we'll come back and talk
about em at rest in a minute uh that's one of the fun things it also has a web socket
support right yep absolutely um what's not good are these things that i'm always like man they're
so cool and you can do all this interesting stuff and then i never ever ever have a use case for it
in my world i just haven't yet and so i'm like well they're they're very cool
but i don't have it yet yeah so i mean i'm not that slack yeah the thing is that um
um usually like when you when you work with web sockets it's also pretty uh common that you need
like some broadcast uh facility so usually you want to do uh channels or or or that kind of stuff
um which usually tends to involve like other software like you usually have
redis or something like that to in order to since python is not exactly good in in let's say uh
managing threads or or communicating across different processes um that's probably why
it's not so easy in the python world to to to actually rely on web sockets a lot um
i don't know for instance if you take like languages like i don't know alex here or yeah
you have like tons of stuff based on the fact that everything is actually communicating over
sockets so yeah yeah and i think like one single thing to say on web sockets um it's i think uh
emmet is the only or one of the few frameworks that allow allows you to write uh middlewares with
sockets so you can okay um so if you have like your chain of middlewares on the application
uh you can also define behaviors for for the same middlewares to behave on web sockets so
uh you can probably use like a lot of code like i don't know if you are in a web socket and need
to talk with the database you can use the same middleware for the database connection you use on
the standard request so i think that's might be worth noting yeah absolutely another thing that's
interesting that i don't see in a lot of orms they kind of just leave it to the well in sql so you
write it is aggregation right the aggregation stuff you have here is pretty interesting where you
do a bunch of calculation type stuff in the database and then get a sort of the results
back right so here you can say like select talking about an event like event dot location
get the counts and then group by this thing order by that having these sort of property that's that's
pretty unique i don't see that in a lot of orms yeah i think like you can do pretty much the same
with sql alchemy but probably like the syntax is less sugarly let's say um yeah i mean like again um
This design comes from the fact that with my first startup,
we had to do a lot of aggregation over the database.
And so yeah, that's why I wrote all of that.
Yeah, that's cool.
I'm seeing code.
Yeah, nice.
You know, I'm familiar with it from all the MongoDB stuff
that I've done, like that over there as well.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'm also familiar.
I'm not a huge fan of Mongo though.
Probably because like being an SRE,
like making Mongo reliable is like a mess sometimes.
So probably that's-
- I think it depends on how people rely on it, right?
- Yeah.
- For me, it's been absolutely,
I've run my stuff on over 10 years and it's been perfect.
However, that's 'cause I use a lot of structured code
from one tech stack, right?
But if some people are using dictionaries to talk to it,
other people are using this framework,
other people are using that framework,
then the lack of schema structure,
I think, becomes a problem.
So I think it really depends on how you use it.
Yeah, I hear what you're saying for sure.
I think that's not even necessarily a Mongo challenge.
That's a document database challenge generally, right?
Yeah, yeah.
Just Mongo is primarily the way people do document databases.
Yeah, I tended to use it for separated stuff.
So in several projects I worked on, I had, for instance,
the main database with Postgres, for instance,
and another database with Mongo for specific stuff,
maybe stuff you don't need transactions on,
or maybe you want to store time series data,
or that kind of stuff.
So for that, I think it's really cool.
Yeah, nice.
All right.
I guess one final thing here that is worth covering,
and then I want to dive into a great new as well,
is the template syntax.
So you've got your own template syntax that's...
That's not a syntax.
You tell people about it.
You tell them about it.
Yeah.
So the templating system embedded in Emmet is called Renoir.
And the idea behind it is to don't have a syntax at all.
So the idea behind Emmet templating system was why--
so the question I had was always like,
why do i have to learn a new language to write server-side render templates like why can't
and those languages are yeah they're very very python-like but they're not python
exactly so i just you know said well i guess so i'll try to do just buy them you know wrap it in
the same brackets every other templating language has uh but um yeah so it's just plain python
you can do pretty much everything you can do in python you can even do imports inside not not
not that i suggest to do that but you can still you can do that um you'll go create people come on
now exactly um the only let's say major difference uh from samden python code is that you have to
write the uh pass keyword after um a block of code so if you write like a for loop or a name statement
um the template engine has to know when that block ends given that python relies on indentation to
to understand like that but in in templates you you don't have like the same in the tissue level
you have in python so that's the only major difference from you know playing python code
um plus a few let's say keyword added to the game so you have extend and include in order to you know
um extend and include so their uh partial templates let's say um and and blocks that's it um right
blocks for the layout sections right yep exactly yeah yeah that's really nice um
i like the idea i'm sure there are people listening that'd be like i would like to try
this stuff out but i've got 10 000 lines of Jinja Jinja or i've got 10 000 lines of chameleon or
yeah yeah yeah no what's i mean i mean i'm i'm working in the office with armin ronaker
every day so yeah you i mean the amount of Jinja code we have in century is like
huge uh so yeah i i i perfectly like understand the point um
i don't have like uh um let's say uh marketing line for for selling you know uh renwar uh is just
you know something that i so today i'm so i mean i'm equally familiar to Jinja templates and and
renoir templates um i'd say um it really depends on you know how how you usually structure um
your application code so um i think like one good way to try out renoir is if you tend to um don't
um use a lot like Jinja filters or stuff like that um that might be a good case scenario to trying
out um Renoir but of course it has to be like a new project because like yeah yeah converting I
mean there's no sense into into moving you know translating code from one system to another once
It's not super different.
So I think you change an end if to a pass, for example,
or end for into a pass.
But I was thinking more, is there a way to use Jinja within Emmet?
It's using Roar.
Yeah.
I mean, there's no plain, there's no read extension for that.
But I mean, if you create like a Jinja instance over the Emmet application, you can call it like in your roots.
You can even like create a middleware for that.
So I think it's pretty easy also to set up Emmet to work with Jinja.
Yeah, I would think so.
I created a chameleon FastAPI, which lets you basically put a decorator on FastAPI endpoints.
And it does chameleon template rendering with a dictionary set of rest endpoints.
It wasn't that much.
You basically just have to juggle it from behind.
So I imagine you could probably,
someone could create a Jinja decorator.
Like you have service.json,
like a template.jinja or whatever,
something like that, right?
Probably?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
That said, I'm not a fan of Jinja.
I think it's overly complicated.
So I'm not encouraged.
I'm not suggesting it.
But the reality is,
even as much as I've tried to fight against it,
is that the majority of Python web
HTML, dynamic HTML is done in Jinja these days.
Yeah, probably.
You kind of got to live in that space, even if you don't want to.
All right.
And let's talk about the thing that I opened,
I talked about at the opening is Granian.
Where's Granian gone?
There we go.
So this is how, as I said, I got to learn about this framework
and what you're doing and stuff with Grani.
And tell us about Grani.
And as a way to sort of kick this off,
Cody, who I've had on the show before from Litestar,
says, thanks for the work on Grani,
and I've had an excellent time using it with Litestar.
Litestar is also awesome.
Yeah, thanks to Cody.
Yeah, so tell us about it.
Yeah, so as the description suggests,
is you know just an http server for python application um so it's um the same it has the
same scope of uh uvcorn g unicorn hypercorn and all that um libraries um the main difference
compared to every other http server for python application is that is not written in python
it's written in rust and it supports uh natively both um boost g and asgi so both uh synchronous
and the synchronous applications.
Plus a new protocol I also wrote with Granian,
which is called RSGI,
but the only existing framework using it
that I'm aware of is Emmet indeed.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think there's a lot of things
that are nice about this.
And I have actually most of the things,
including Talk Python itself,
running on Granian,
which is pretty cool.
Cool.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
So single correct HTTP implementation.
Sounds awesome.
Support for version 1, 2, and 3, I guess, when it's ratified, right?
Yeah, so HTTP 3, let's say,
so since Granian is actually based on a Rust library,
which is called um hyper uh which is a super cool library it's like
vastly adopted like everywhere uh in the world like I don't know how many thousand hundreds of
thousands of libraries in in the rust ecosystem use it uh it is used in in Cloudflare uh for a
of their production system.
So super strong library.
But yes, it doesn't yet support HTTP3.
So yeah, I guess when Hyper will support HTTP3,
that could be easily added to Granian.
Right, right.
That's cool.
Yeah, with things like GUnicorn,
you've then got to also integrate Uvicorn workers.
and you kind of have a lot of stuff at play right so here you just got one thing which is cool
yeah i mean like i i i tended to to find annoying the fact that um if you want like to squeeze out
like performance out of uh uvcorn you usually need to yeah pile up different libraries together like
oh wait i need to add the http tools dependency uh so it can use this like the c written parsers for
http uh oh wait and probably i want some process management uh so i need also unicorn
um yeah it's not super easy like for starters at least yeah and i guess maybe we should just set
stage a little bit for people that don't live and breathe python web deployment topologies
so typically you would have something like nginx or caddy that browser actually talks to
and then behind the scenes you set up those let's just say nginx to when there's a request for a
dynamic content or python based content as opposed to like a css file or something
then it will talk to this category of servers that then maybe is juggling multiple processes
so that it can increase the scalability of your python apps and stuff like that right so
gradient lives in that sort of bubble behind engine x typically right
um use it otherwise yes and no meaning that um you can also deploy it like on the edge so
so um i think it really depends how your structure let's say your code so um so for instance like for
vg applications uh like in django um we tends to i mean the we often like um offload let's say
static file serving to Nginx since we already have Nginx somewhere, relying on some headers
we sent to the restaurants that Nginx actually parse and understand what to do.
so if in general if you don't need like that kind of optimization let's say you can still use granium
like even on the edge uh because i mean it supports like ssl it supports like http2 directly um so
um i mean having nginx above uh granium makes sense only if you want to root uh something out
of granium and not uh you know serve it from from granium but um yeah in general i'd say that you
can use it in in both ways like behind nginx or not um up to the specific needs of the application
let's say yeah yeah i have one nginx docker server container handling like 15 different apps
so for me that's kind of the setup but uh typically the ssl that i do is over let's encrypt
using certbot uh how do i if i want to do https with granny and how do i do it um i mean you can
you can keep like the let's encrypt and that message uh generation thing um because uh granny
supports uh the cgap signal so um whenever you need to refresh the certificate you can issue a
cgap to the granny process and that process will reload the workers picking up the new certificate
so i think it's pretty straightforward i mean if you if you already manage like ssl certificates and
like renewal uh chain and all that kind of stuff it's pretty straightforward to do the same in
granian um you can just pass you know the paths to the certificates to the cli um command or
even use environment variables up to you gotcha okay
OK.
One thing that I thought was pretty interesting
was the performance.
Not necessarily that it's so, so, so much faster,
but that it's so, so much more consistent.
Do you want to talk about that a little bit?
Yeah, so I think if you want to show to the YouTube audience
the comparison thing, you find the link in the bottom of the page,
because the first phase of benchmarks in the repository
contains just benchmarks of Grandiets itself,
whereas in the versus page, you can find comparison
with other servers.
so um the thing behind let's say the stable uh keyword uh i used
into describing like the performance of Granian um was uh about the fact that um
usually when people looks at um at benchmarks just look at the you know number of requests
uh yeah yeah yeah yeah what's the max request per second you can get with this exactly yeah uh but um
the another like very important uh value at least to me is like the latency uh because you can
you can still serve like a lot of requests in parallel uh but the amount of time each request
will take to to be served it's also like important i mean i can serve like a thousand records per
second but um if those requests takes a second or it takes like 10 milliseconds it's like a huge
difference for the end user uh and so um the thing is that from from at least from benchmarks um it
appears uh that um the way granian it works uh which relies on having like all the network
stack separated from python so all the io uh the real io part um involving the network communication
is not tied to the python interpreter and so it doesn't suffer from the global interpreter lock
and you know threads getting blocked between each other um it seems to make like ryan to be um more
let's say uh predictable in response time meaning that the uh both the average latency
and the maximum latency you have um in in the benchmarks is much lower compared to other uh
let's say uh implementations um other http servers um so yeah it's not like
it's not like super faster it won't make like obviously it won't make the python code of your
application faster um we could shut down all of our servers except for one five dollar digital
ocean server and just yeah no not really um but uh but at least it should you know normalize um
in a way um the response time of your application yeah yeah yeah so the standard deviation of the
request time is way way tighter the distribution of the request time is way way tighter even though
you do seem to have generally the fastest times but if you look at the difference of the average
times in the max times the difference is a lot smaller it's like one like two and a half times
variation versus some of the other ones are many yeah 10x or something yeah 100x or some of them
Yeah, absolutely.
Okay.
Yeah, that's what really I thought was pretty interesting
is the super predictability of it.
One thing I want to ask you about is you did say it does this RSGI.
Do you want to call it GGSGI, the Granian server interface?
No, whatever.
No, it's like a Rust server gateway interface.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's what I figured.
And you said Emmet uses this, which is awesome.
What's the advantage?
Is there a significant advantage to doing things differently
rather than ASGI or something?
Would it be worth things like Flask saying,
hey, should we support this if we're running on top of Grannian
or things like that's what I'm getting at?
So I don't actually know if Flask today also supports
asynchronous
with court they do
okay so court
might take advantage
of rsgi
meaning that it's still an asynchronous
protocol so you have
to be in an asynchronous context
to use rsgi
but the main
difference let's say
between
asgi and rsgi
is that
it's in the
how to say
the communication mechanism
or let's say the communication entities
meaning that
so in ASGI
you have usually have
two
methods, two awaitable methods
which are like send and receive
and you
get
push uh let's say dictionaries to to those methods um uh which are referred as messages
so usually have like uh a dictionary which has a type um key which contains like the type of
message which might be i don't know http request or http body or web socket message
um and um all the intercommunication between like the uh the server and the application
relies on those um dictionaries uh with specific keys and and strings um
and since you have like a single uh let's say interface to to uh rely on that um
and that interface is asynchronous um it also means you it means two things um the first thing
is that every time you want to say something to the server uh or to the client um you have to await
uh for that message even if there's no actually io involved in that operation so right which is a
context and overhead and all of that stuff right exactly so for for example when you so sending
back a response in asgi involves uh typically at least two messages so the first one is to start
the response so you instruct the server with the response code and the headers you want to send
back to the count to the client um and the following message or messages are the body of that response
the fun fact is that um the response start event doesn't involve any io at all um it doesn't use
the network so what happens in that is that you delaying the operation that you
are supposed to do which is just saying okay i'm gonna send some data and these are things like
yeah um you're gonna delay that operation to the next cycle of the of the event loop
uh in in your python code so um that adds like quite a lot of overhead um
and and i mean i understand like why the interface is made in in in this way because it's like
super straightforward it's very simple you have like the same interface to do everything but at
At the same time, it feels very unperformant in a way
because we are wasting tons of--
even I don't understand why do we need to waste event loop
cycles to do something that is actually synchronous code.
Yeah, sure.
And so, yeah, RSGI changed this in a way
that you have interfaces which are synchronous or asynchronous
depending on what you're actually planning to do.
For example, if you have the entire body--
so if your root returns a JSON string, OK?
you don't need to actually await for sending the body
because you already have like all the bodies.
So the interfacinger.
Yeah, there's no IO.
Yeah.
It's not like a file stream pointer or whatever they said to return.
Exactly.
So in that case, in RSGI, you can use a synchronous method
to just move the body to the server and just let the response goes.
Nice.
Whereas if you want to stream content,
then you can use a specific interface for that in RSGI,
which is RESTfulStream.
And that gives you like an interface to send chunks of body
or iterate over something as you're supposed to do.
That's the major thing.
The other thing, like the other reason why RSGI exists is that,
um yeah a sgi is designed based on the fact that uh the network communication happens under python
uh which is something that granium can do because um can emulate because it supports asgi but um
That also makes...
That also waste...
So if you have the chance to have a different implementation,
that makes, like, things a lot more difficult to implement.
Meaning reasoning, like, if you were in Python,
but you're actually in a different language.
So, yeah, that's the other reason why RSGI exists.
Okay. Yeah, it's very interesting.
Yeah, maybe some of the other frameworks could look at that and go, well, if it's available,
it's an option.
Okay, a couple of things I want to talk about before we run out of time here.
One is Jazzy Coder out in the audience asks, how did you validate your library following
the correct spec?
Did you reference the RFCs or another library or if you need to go back to principles of
the Unix networking programming book?
and for background interested in this approach
because I'm building my own WSGI server.
Okay, cool.
So the idea--
so I mean, Whiskey protocol is documented in a pep,
so I just implemented tests that respect
what is defined into the original PEP uh about wooski with uh just an exception um so the only
exception in for granian in wooski protocol is that it's able to serve http 2 over wooski
which is not supposed to happen but with granon you can serve your booski application directly
with HTTP2.
But yeah, that's the way I was sure to respect the protocol.
How about like the HTTP2 protocol?
Are you using just a library that already has it all figured out?
Yes, yes.
I mean, reinventing the wheel like also for HTTP handling
was something I wasn't looking for.
So, yeah, Hyper is, again, super battle test.
It is used by, I don't know, something like Cloud4 Introduction.
And this is a Rust crate or something like that?
Yep.
Yeah, exactly.
Awesome.
All right, very cool.
The other thing I want to ask you about or just let you speak to real quick is there's a bunch of features
like specifying the HTTP interface level.
Like, do you want to restrict it to one or two?
You might care because there was a vulnerability in HTTP 2
to create like some kind of too much work
or too many retries or something recently.
So maybe you want to switch it to one for a while.
I don't know.
Maybe you should talk about some of the...
Yeah, go ahead.
Fun fact, Granian wasn't affected by that
because hyper the library behind it wasn't affected by that oh nice that's awesome yeah i figured
basically you just in this case you wait until hyper either fixes it or hyper is not a problem
right which is great but maybe just talk about some of the things that we haven't touched on
that are interesting like blocking threads or threading mode or or specifying the loop or so on
so yeah uh so in granian so since granian has this unique architecture where you have
an event loop running on the rust side so for instance if you're like uh deploying your asgi
application with granian you will have two event loops like the python one uh the ones uh that
runs your code and also a rust event loop which is actually the tokyo uh runtime is another super
popular crate um in the rust ecosystem um there are a different way to run the rust runtime meaning
that um rust is not limited to having a single thread running the loop and thus you can have
an event loop running on several different threads on the last side and so the threading mode option
in um in granian lets you specify that behavior meaning that if you use the runtime option uh you
will end up having like um multi-threaded runtimes uh on the russ side whereas if you uh specify the
workers option for the threading mode,
it will still use a single threaded runtime
also on the Rust side.
The option is--
If you say the runtime mode, did the workers themselves
each get multiple threads?
Is that how that works?
Yes, exactly.
So in runtime mode, every worker
has multi-threaded runtimes, whereas on the worker side,
have like the worker is also the run thing yeah got it um and the other thing was like
depending on the load of your of your application like one of the two might work better um sure
depends on the io and cpu boundness of your application so yeah
i don't want to go too much into these but if i set threading mode to run time
is it reasonable to have just one worker or is it still makes sense to have multiple workers
on um so the thing is that uh with a single worker so the the
the workers will spawn their own python interpreters so every worker uh is limited to um the global
interpreter lock meaning that yeah um even if you spawn like a single worker with i don't know 12
threads uh those 12 threads we run in the rust code yeah but they share a python runtime which
exactly all the things that that means exactly uh so the only way to scale so the workers is
the way to scale let's say the python code of your application um threads and um threats are um
useful to scale the rust runtime of stuff no there are some the rust side of stuff of the things
uh meaning that uh this will be like the amount of threads used by rust to handle your requests
so um for example if your application runs opens like a tons of websocket maybe you have like a
websocket service uh it might be helpful to spawn more threads for the uh russ site so it can
actually handle more more of those requests um in the web socket land um and the blocking threads
are mostly relevant only for the buski um protocol um meaning that uh the blocking threads are the
amount of threads used by granian to interact with the with python code so on asgi since you will
have like the event loop um there's no so much difference in how many threads you how many
blocking threads uh you spawn because those blocking threads will still have to schedule
stuff on the python event loop but on wooski since you don't have um you're not limited to
the main thread of python so if you're i don't know maybe your application is using
um you're using cypher pg to to connect to the database um and those uh libraries are able to
released the global interpreter block so having multiple blocking threads on boosgi might be
helpful uh still be helpful because like all the code which doesn't involve the gil will be able to
run in right power right maybe one part one thread one request is waiting on a database call which
it hits the network which releases the GIL for example right exactly yeah okay what about this
optimizations.
Because opt and no op.
Yeah, that's--
What kind of magic is in there?
That's a bit complicated, meaning that--
so I think writing writing was super helpful for me,
at least, to understand the internals of a synch.io
in the Python world.
and if i have to be honest i i don't really like how i think ko is implemented behind hood but
anyway um i feel like you have to juggle you have to be so aware of what loop is running has a loop
been created is there a different one have i got the wrong loop like all of that stuff it should be
utterly transparent and i just i should just tell python i want to run stuff in a loop and i don't
I don't want to, you know, I don't want to,
it's not like I'm managing the memory
or juggling, you know, the GC.
Like, I feel like asyncio should be the same.
You should say, I want to run stuff asynchronously
and maybe somewhere I've configured that
or maybe it's automatic or whatever,
but just do any, you're always kind of like,
you know, for example,
if you talk to the database asynchronously
at the start of your web app
and then you use FastAPI
and you try to use it in your request there,
say well you're on the wrong event loop it's like well yep why do i care about this just run it on
the loop like you know what i mean like that's kind of that's been a complaint of mine
since three five but hey yeah nobody asked me so yeah so yeah and and those let's say optimizations
are actually uh a few hockey parts in fact like um i think like fast api doesn't work with loop
optimization enabled with Granian because it skips.
So those optimization just keeps one of the first iterations
into running asynchronous code.
I think going more deeper than this in details
would be long and hard to follow.
But let's just say it just keeps some steps
in the task running in the other loop.
Yeah, okay.
You can do things like specified SSL certificates and stuff.
This one right here is pretty excellent.
I mean, I don't know who worked on that one.
I didn't work out, but I inspired,
I requested this one as the right way to put it.
You can say the process name, which is nice.
Yeah, yeah.
If you're running multiple sites
all on Grandin on the same server,
so you can differentiate.
Which one is using the memory again?
And while we're looking at this,
Can I ask, can I propose an idea and just get your feedback on it,
get your thoughts?
What about like a lifetime management type of feature where you say,
after 10,000 requests, just recreate the worker,
or after an hour, recreate the worker, or something like that?
Is this a thing that is in any interest to you?
um so i understand like the need for that uh especially for i think it's like
one of those requests that uh is based on the fact of using like boosgi or at least like it's
coming more from the jungle user land.
So I think making a lifetime that kind of check
would be kind of hard in a sense that there's
a lot involved into the process management of Granian
because you have the Python process,
and then you have Python threads,
and then you have the Rust threads,
and then you have the runtimes.
So reasoning of lifetime probably is kind of hard.
I think fixing a maximum number of requests per worker
is something...
Yeah, it can be done, let's say, pretty easily.
Yeah, that issue is open by...
There's an issue for that open by a few times, if I recall correctly.
The thing is that, let's say, in the prioritization queue...
It's not a good time.
let's say at the moment like um i'm i'm talking with some people uh that uh propose their self um
to join as a contributor or uh on granian but let's say at the moment i'm still like um
a single main contributor so sure um i need to make you know uh some priority cues uh into
Yeah, I think the one which is more requested right now
is the access log.
So I think that would be the next one, probably.
Yeah, sure.
I think, honestly, that's more important,
the access log, than this one.
Yeah, something changed in one of my apps,
and it just all of a sudden slowly just keeps growing in memory,
and i'm pretty sure i've not done anything to make those changes and it's it's something in a third
party library data access database or something else i don't know what it is but it's just
and it's fine but it just consumes so much memory and so i i need to know some other thing to just
just say look after like a day just you know just give it a refresh you know let it let it refresh
itself you know that uh with sentry sdk now we have also profiling so you can actually
look into the stocks of memory locations even like live on your application so
yeah if you need to debug something like that you you can try like distributed or something like
that yeah uh i mean this you're addressing is more like about um right together like different
and searches, like this is profiling.
Yeah, okay.
Flame graphs and stuff to see where does your application.
It's driving me crazy, and I would love to just do a PR somewhere
and just go, hey, guys, this changed.
Here's the problem.
Or if it is my problem and I just like,
there's nothing I really changed in the core of this thing,
but it seems to have started going weird that maybe I don't know.
But anyway, it would be great.
I'll have a look at it.
Thanks.
All right.
What's next?
What's next for Granian?
yeah i think like uh fulfilling a couple of feature requests like the access log like the
worker max requests or a few let's say uh minor things in in in that sense um
i think like in terms of um major features um
it's pretty solid at the moment as a server um after let's say the idea is like after these uh
feature requests um the idea was to i mean it's just an idea at the moment but i'd like to you
know try to add some uh features to the rsgi protocol um for example uh we talked uh before
about channels um and web sockets so um as i said before like i find very annoying like every time
i want to you know make even just a chat room i need to you know put redis there and manage redis
and whatever um and not like that kind of complexity to to to my project and so i was
thinking about like embedding some broadcasting features into the rsgi protocol because you know
like while all other servers for python are written in python and so they're like still bound to you
you know, the process paradigm of Python
on the rough side of things,
that's not true anymore.
So the idea, yeah,
would be to have something to broadcast messages
between processes and even different running servers.
So, yeah, that's what I have on my table at the moment.
All right.
Well, excellent.
And, you know, thanks for working on this.
It's an excellent project.
And it's really cool to see kind of the innovation, like you were saying just there.
If it's not in Python, if it could be in Rust, what would we change that would make that more capable even for the Python people, right?
Yeah, exactly.
And I think it's like the baseline philosophy of people like Samuel Colvin with the Pydantic project to try to empower Python the most, keeping the simplicity and the syntax we all love about Python.
But yeah, I mean, I think it's like a very good way of, you know, evolving even the Python language.
Yeah, absolutely.
You know, sometimes you'll hear people say Python is slow.
And then like in some sort of pure sense, that's true.
But then, you know, you put it on top of things like Grandin and all of a sudden it's awesome, right?
So thanks for playing your part in that.
Thank you, too.
yeah you bet and thanks for coming on the show see you next time thank you bye bye